
=== PAGE 1 ===
Paper prepared for the Section “Geopolitics and Economic Statecraft: Elite Strategies in a
Fragmenting World Order” at the 18th Pan-European Conference on International Relations of the
European International Studies Association (EISA), University of Bologna, Italy, 25-29 August
2025
Intermediaries and Global Restructuring. Exploring
Russia’s Adaptation Brokerage Networks
Sebastian Hoppe∗
January 8, 2026
Abstract
Global political-economic fragmentation has significantly enhanced the role of actor
webs mediating between state agencies, corporate actors, social constituencies, and
the world economy. Yet this relevance of intermediaries contrasts with their neglect
in existing scholarship. This exploratory paper pursues three goals: It first provides
a novel conceptual framework of adaptation brokerage networks (ABNs) - individuals,
firms, and institutions that mediate between adapting states, economies and societies,
on the one hand, and mutually reinforcing global patterns of change, on the other.
Second, the paper proposes an iterative mixed-methods strategy grounded in Social
Network Analysis to construct, describe, visualize, and compare ABNs across issue ar-
eas, sectors, and countries. Third, I explore the evolving cross-border networks of Kirill
Dmitriev, the CEO of the Russian Direct Investment Fund, across four periods from
2010 to 2025 as an example of how Russia has been adapting to geopolitical ruptures
and global restructuring. Preliminary evidence points to a high degree of flexibility
of Dmitriev’s domestic and international networks over time, suggesting a surprising
capacity of Russia’s state-permeated political economy to remain globally integrated
amidst war, sanctions, supply chain disruptions, and the constraints of extractivism.
I argue that a significant mechanism through which the state attains this flexibility
is the elite broker-mediated repurposing of institutions and agencies for tasks beyond
their originally envisaged objectives. The conclusion weighs the theoretical benefits of
a political-economic network approach to Russia’s adaptive capacity against alternative
explanations.
Keywords: global political economy, adaptation, networks, brokerage, Russia
∗Centre for East European and International Studies (ZOiS), Berlin, sebastian.hoppe@zois-berlin.de

=== PAGE 2 ===
1 Introduction
In 2025, images of shuttered Western franchises in Moscow are vying for space with head-
lines about record Russian oil revenues, Russo-Gulf sovereign wealth fund tie-ups, and the
flash launch of ’friendly’ BRICS payment systems.1On paper, sweeping sanctions, carbon
tariffs and tech export bans should have strangled Russia’s global reach since at least the
first half of the 2010s, when Vladimir Putin returned for a third, much more revisionist
presidency and not much later send his troops to annex the Russian peninsula Crimea - let
alone since the full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022. Yet despite all setbacks, the Krem-
lin’s economic nerve centre continues to (shadow) ship and import resources and technology
through new corridors, tap foreign finance, engage substantially in multilateral fora, and
even tout green(ed) investment projects via a new carbon units registry. Seeking to find
an explanation for this unexpected resilience that goes beyond Russia’s sheer geographical
might, fossil weight, or Soviet-induced nuclear arsenal, one necessarily encounters a grow-
ing body of anecdotal evidence and investigative reporting on the critical role of enabling
intermediaries. These accounts – most of them journalistic – point to a rich variety of actor
webs helping the Russian state to adapt to global change: lawyers in Cyprus and London,
diplomats in Riyadh and Ankara, bankers in Hong Kong and New York, sanction busters
in EU member states, logistics firms specialised in trade rerouting, and an ilk of globally
dispersed ideological admirers of the Kremlin’s cause, all of which stitch together Russia’s
surprisingly enduring global circuits of resources, legitimacy, and influence (G¨ otz and Mac-
Farlane, 2022; Filis, 2019; Stent, 2019; Melville, Akhremenko, and Mironyuk, 2019; G¨ otz
and Merlen, 2019).
However, what these invaluable investigations lack is a systematic account of how these
actors operate and how their networks evolve – not only with respect to sanction evasion
schemes and supply chains feeding Russia’s war efforts, but more broadly under the “polycri-
1. I am deeply grateful to Anna Filippova, research assistant at ZOiS, and Aram Bagdasarian, student at
Harvard University and research intern at ZOiS from May to July 2025, for their invaluable assistance in
preparing this paper.
1

=== PAGE 3 ===
sis” conditions of global restructuring in the 21st century (Helleiner, 2024). These conditions
include the multipolar splintering of diplomatic conduct, the fracturing of economic inter-
dependence, decarbonization becoming a physiologically necessary yet politically contested
imperative, and calls for on-shoring production and unmediated access to natural resources
amidst heightened geopolitics.
To provide such an account, this paper advances the concept of adaptation brokerage
networks (ABNs) – cross-border webs of individuals, firms, and institutions that mediate
between a state’s idiosyncratic domestic order and a changing and increasingly fragmented
global political economy. Unlike classic theories of globalization, which for long assumed the
global emergence of a unified transnational capitalist space, this paper maintains that ABNs
flourish precisely because today’s order is incoherent: Overlapping yet porous sanctions
regimes, clashing yet nonetheless economically interdependent geopolitical blocs, and rival
climatestandardsfittingvariegated(non-)growthregimespullindifferentdirections, eliciting
highly uneven national trajectories of political-economic adaptation. In this environment,
the management of power hinges on privileged access to elite networks and rent circulation
schemes, materializing in platforms, corridors, loopholes, and exemptions, which only – as
this paper seeks to demonstrate – well-placed state-centred elite brokers can unlock.
The study of networks and brokers can build on a long-standing strand within Interna-
tional Political Economy (IPE) scholarship (Hafner-Burton, Kahler, and Montgomery, 2009;
Hafner-Burton and Montgomery, 2009; Oatley et al., 2013; Busch and Juska, 1997; Emmert-
Streib et al., 2018; Kobrin, 1997; van Apeldoorn and Graaff, 2016; Graaff, 2011). Moreover,
several studies single out brokerage as one of the key mechanisms steering network dynamics
(Goddard, 2009; Halevy, Halali, and Zlatev, 2019; Kwon et al., 2020; Martinus et al., 2021;
Sigler, Neal, and Martinus, 2023; Subacchi, 2008; Xiang, Lin, and Wang, 2023). In SNA,
a broker is usually defined as an intermediary that occupies a crucial network position –
a “structural hole” (Burt, 2010) – between other actors, whom it allows to interact by fa-
cilitating financial, material or knowledge exchange. At a more abstract level, brokers can
2

=== PAGE 4 ===
be understood as managing relations among states, institutions, companies, and individuals
by means of relational capital (Kale, Singh, and Perlmutter, 2000, p. 218), whereas they
themselves often lack direct control over military resources or the capacity for state action.
At the same time, brokers are not independent actors but usually belong to the institutional
or economic spaces of one or more states - they are "state-centred" without necessarily be-
ing part of the formal state apparatus - or fall under the authority supranational bodies or
multinational corporations. The degree to which brokers are subject to direct state or or-
ganizational control varies, however (Laruelle and Kevin Limonier, 2021) . In fact, the very
quality of an actor as a broker strongly depends on the context, in the sense that brokers in
one concrete set of historical and spatial conditions may lose their broker quality in another
set of conditions. The activities of brokers are often geographically dispersed, temporally
limited, sector-specific, and typically exercised across borders (Subacchi, 2008).
Brokers are critical for how both states and societies adapt to macro-structural change,
that is, multilevel reconfigurations in global diplomatic, political and economic processes.
Maintaining or gaining access to resources, knowledge and institutions via brokers in a
changing environment allows state elites, companies and societal groups to reduce insecu-
rity and organize modifications to their own strategies of social and economic reproduction.
Paraphrasing one of Nassim Nicholas Taleb’s (2016) popular bestsellers, brokers and broker
networks, if thoroughly organised, can contribute to the “anti-fragile” structure of a political
economy. Adaptation can thus be defined as the social, economic, political and cultural ad-
justment of individuals, groups or states to actual or expected changes in external processes,
practices and structures, which aim at moderating potential damages or benefitting from
opportunities associated with this change.2
Applying network approaches to the case of post-Soviet Russia in particular has been
highly productive. Studies of what some characterize as a the “Russian network state”
(Moshes and Kononenko, 2011) include the analysis of patron-client networks as drivers
2. This definition has been adopted in a modified way from United Nations (2025).
3

=== PAGE 5 ===
of regime personalization (Baturo and Elkink, 2016; Leeson et al., 2024), the networked
management of regional governance (Berg-Nordlie, Holm-Hansen, and Kropp, 2018) and
the military-industrial complex (Shkurenko et al., 2025), personal networks as facilitators of
state-building(Easter,1996),intra-stateelitenetworks(KryschtanowskajaandWhite,2011),
networks as means of everyday informal exchange (Ledeneva, 1998; Michailova and Worm,
2003; Rose, 2000), patronage networks as foreign policy tools (Marten, 2013), networks as
bottlenecks of financial regulation (Viktorov, 2015), networks of treaties in Russia’s regional
policies (Willerton, Slobodchikoff, and Goertz, 2012), and BRICS as a networked geopolitical
structure (Жданов, 2013). However, almost none of these studies, while being conceptually
innovative and empirically rich, systematically utilizes the methodological registers of SNA
for its analysis, both in terms of large-scale data collection and network construction as well
as regarding the analytical and comparative strategies applied to the network data. This
has led to a rather eclectic image of the Russian network state, which remains unrelated to
both Russia’s broader political-economic trajectory as well as global structural change more
broadly.
Nonetheless, the above studies indicate that Russia under Putin provides a well-placed
laboratoryforthestudyofnetworkedadaptationandtheroleofbrokerage. Ontheonehand,
it is a critical and information-rich case of personalist and networked authoritarian politics,
which is relatively well-covered by daily media publications and investigative reporting as
well as area-focused scholarship. Moreover, since at least the Global Financial Crisis in
2008 (GFC), the Russian state has faced immense external pressure to adapt its extractivist
growth model (Gaddy and Ickes, 2010), putting severe stress on the networks managing
Russia’s political economy. Since 2014, furthermore, Moscow has faced ever tighter Western
sanctions while simultaneously deepening ties with Gulf sovereign funds, Chinese develop-
ment banks, and climate finance platforms, to name only a few. In fact, Russian attempts
at import substitution and industrial policy can be traced back even before its fallout with
Ukraine, starting in the winter of 2011/12 with Putin’s orchestrated return to the presiden-
4

=== PAGE 6 ===
tial office. In attempting to reinvigorate Russian industry and diversify trade partners, Putin
has not only pursued a more conservative and ideologically grounded turn in domestic and
economic policy-making, including a much more confrontational stance vis-` a-vis the West
(Bluhm, 2023). The Russian state elite and its bureaucracy were also adapting to global
macro-processes – changes in global finance after the GFC, the consolidation of sanctions as
a tool of statecraft in the wake of Western policies vis-a-vis Iran, Libya and Syria, long-term
decarbonization, and the emergence of new multipolar diplomatic networks. These macro-
processes represent both profound challenges and new opportunities for Russia’s political
economy that go beyond the Kremlin’s short-term management of the consequences of its
ill-fated campaign to subjugate Ukraine.
On the other hand, despite its centrality in the study of authoritarianism, global resource
politics and sanctions, the Russian case remains under-explored in important empirical,
theoretical and methodological aspects. Empirically, there are almost no network studies
on the role of border-crossing webs linking Russia to different realms of the global order
3. Theoretically, the study of networks in Russia hardly ever discusses the repercussions
of network dynamics against the context of Russia’s broader political-economic trajectory
and global integration, such as its capacity to adapt to structural change. One of the most
pressing and obvious questions, namely to what extent Russia’s networks function better
in certain sectors than in others, and what this means for the overall adaptability of the
Russian political economy, has not been raised at all. In fact, this theoretical gap surpasses
Russian politics: despite surging scholarly interest in modes of adaptation, resilience- and
capacity-building, and state-led (re)actions vis-` a-vis the global polycrisis, there has been a
conceptual neglect of the uneven individual, institutional and corporate networks, strategies
and resource exchanges facilitating adaptation on behalf of state elites, corporate actors
and social constituencies (an exclusion being Graaff, 2012). This is despite the fact that
the global restructuring of trade, finance and production amidst geopolitical conflict and
3. Notable exceptions include the foreign policy analyses by Willerton et al., 2012 and Marten, 2013
5

=== PAGE 7 ===
increasing multipolar fragmentation has significantly enhanced the role of intermediaries.
Finally, inmethodologicalterms, muchofthewidertoolbox, analyticalstrategiesandmetrics
of (multiplex) SNA have remained virtually untapped in network studies on Russia. This
is not a pedantic call for more methodological rigour as an end in itself: The failure to
ground the study of networks in and from Russia firmly in SNA methodologies has not
only made it more difficult to articulate the contributions that the Russian case can make
to transdisciplinary network theory. It also makes it harder to bring the insights from the
Russian case into a comparative dialogue with other network states facing similar adaptation
imperatives.
Addressing this threefold gap, the paper seeks to make the following contributions. First,
it offers a new conceptual framework that integrates SNA with the study of state-led adap-
tation in the global political economy. The paper specifies characteristic core mechanisms
of ABNs and derives hypotheses about how important network metrics should shift after
structural shocks. Second, I propose a mixed-methods strategy that pairs multiplex SNA
with qualitative case study research techniques. Publicly documented node, edge, events and
source template sheets (to be published separately with the project’s conclusion as a compre-
hensive dataset4), including source confidence scoring, make the approach transparent and
replicable. Third, I provide preliminary evidence of Russia’s ABN in late Putinism, tracing
how its topology re-configured before and after Russia’s annexation of Crimea (2014), during
the global COVID-19 crisis (2020-21), and the full-scale invasion of Ukraine (2022). For this
analysis, I construct a network around one particular figure who stands at the nerve centre
of Russia’s adaptive web: Kirill Dmitriev, since 2011 CEO of the Russian Direct Invest-
ment Fund (RDIF) and, since 2025, Special Presidential Envoy on Foreign Investment and
Economic Cooperation. This paper treats Dmitriev and his extended network as a window
into and exemplary case of Russia’s ABN. Like few others, Dmitriev’s career illustrates the
4. The paper is part of the research project Adaptation Brokers: Global Structural Change and the Political
Economy of Russian Sovereigntism (SOVBROKE) atthe Centre for East European and International Studies
(ZOiS)in Berlin.
6

=== PAGE 8 ===
repertoire of modern brokerage: socialized and educated in both Russia and Western top-tier
universities, international career without losing touch to the heights of Russian state power,
later facilitator of co-investments with Blackstone and Goldman Sachs, among others; cre-
ator of joint funds with Mubadala and PIF after sanctions; vaccine diplomacy with sovereign
lenders during the COVID-19 pandemic; and most recently, an ESG rebranding of Russian
projects to court new pools of “green” capital. His extended, border-crossing networks, the
domestic and international institutions he has engaged with, the international deals he has
helped facilitate and, not least, him being close to Putin, thus offer a living laboratory for
testing the ABN concept and exploring how ABNs operate empirically.
The paper’s preliminary findings suggest that Russia’s resilience in light of geopolitical
pressure, sanctions and the limits of extractivism has only little to do with clever policies,
hidden reserves or alternative payment systems. For they are merely the outcome of a highly
adaptive class of intermediaries who reroute, relabel, and re-legitimize resources and assets
across jurisdictional seams at the service of Russian state power (Lambroschini, 2024; Shaw
andIordachi, 2023). TheevidencepointstoahighdegreeofflexibilityofDmitriev’sdomestic
and international networks over time, suggesting a surprising capacity of Russia’s political
economy to remain globally integrated amidst war, sanctions, supply chain disruptions, and
the constraints of extractivism. More specifically, I argue that a significant mechanism
through which the state attains this flexibility is the elite broker-mediated repurposing of
institutions and agencies for tasks beyond their originally envisaged objectives. The RDIF,
headed by Dmitriev, is a prime example of this institutional repurposing.
By bringing SNA into dialogue with critical political economy debates, the paper shows
that the real story of global fragmentation is written not only in tariffs and treaties on na-
tional re-industrialization, but in the relational infrastructures that let elites, resources and
information pass through and operate through the public and hidden emerging networks
along the polycrisis. In the Russian case, this infrastructure is, above all, inextricably inter-
woven with the personalistic fabric of Russian statehood and has demonstrated a surprising
7

=== PAGE 9 ===
flexibility and adaptability under the pressures of world market volatility, political contes-
tation, and even war. This is not to argue in favour of the supposed sustainability and
functionality of the Russian growth model. Anno 2025, the country’s political economy is
unbalanced and subject to serious distortions. However, the implication of this paper is that
the ability of the Russian state elite to withstand these deep crises, if not to resolve them, by
means of personalism, ABNs, and institutional repurposing should not be underestimated.
This holds all the more true in a world that is witnessing a return of personalist rule at
the cost of depersonalised state structures (Hanson and Kopstein, 2022), opening manifold
“interfaces” for Russia’s ABNs across the globe (Hoppe, forthcoming).
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops the conceptual frame-
work of ABNs, locates it within wider IPE discussions about global economic restructuring,
and specifies the core mechanisms of ABNs. Section 3 details the data sources for this paper
and describes the methodological workflow, including the construction of the Dmitriev net-
work and introduction of important network metrics. Section 4 maps Dmitriev’s network,
highlightingbothitsgeneralarchitectureandpatternsaswellasitsadaptivereconfigurations
after major geopolitical, crisis and regulatory shocks. Section 5 concludes by weighing the
theoretical benefits of a political-economic network approach to Russia’s adaptive capacity
against alternative explanations and suggesting avenues for globally comparative research
on ABNs.
2 Adaptation Brokerage Networks: A Conceptual Frame-
work
The ABN framework is predicated on three complementary concepts, each of which focuses
on a different aspect of the nexus between state strategies, networks, and the global political
economy: the networked structure of globalization, adaptation as both an proactive strate-
gic and reactive process pursued by states, and brokers as managers of cross-border rent
8

=== PAGE 10 ===
channelling. This section describes each of these aspects in more detail. When considered
collectively, they form the three pillars of a conceptual framework that can shed light not
only on Russia’s relative resilience in late Putinism, despite the geopolitical and economic
pressures it has faced. As the paper’s conclusion argues, it may also elucidate and compare
the political and economic trajectories led by states in other countries that are also grappling
with similar challenges emerging from global restructuring.
First, while the idea of a networked global political economy can be found throughout the
modern history of economic thinking, it has gained significant trajectory with the discourse
on globalization and the transformative impact of cross-border information and resource
flows (Kobrin, 1997). A host of scholars recast globalization in network terms during the
1990s. Castells’s Network Society thesis, to pick a widely discussed example, argued that
new information-technology networks span the globe without boundaries, creating “a new
spatial architecture” that links major cities into a single world-system (Castells, 2010). In
a similar vein, Saskia Sassen’s Global Cities research posited a “new spatial order” under
globalization, which would be organized by networks of global metropoles connected by
digital infrastructures and flows of people, capital and culture (Sassen, 2013). Economists
andgeographerslikewiseshiftedtonetwork-basedmodels,showingthattransnationalwebsof
firmsandsuppliers–oftencalledglobalproductionnetworks(GPNs)orvaluechains–arethe
“critical organizational platforms” coordinating world production (Yeung and Coe, 2015). In
short, from the mid-1990s onward the dominant accounts of globalization supplanted linear
or hierarchical metaphors with an emphasis on interlocking networks of power, finance,
information and culture.
Even as growth in global trade and investment has slowed or stalled in recent years, schol-
ars continue to use network concepts to explain the contemporary landscape. Proponents
of the network view note that globalization’s underlying web of ties remains in place – and
indeed can be exploited for advantage – even amid protectionist backlashes. For example,
Farrell and Newman (2019) show that key global economic networks are highly asymmetric:
9

=== PAGE 11 ===
major powers that jurisdictionally control central nodes (such as financial messaging or in-
ternet platforms) can “weaponize interdependence” by using their network position to gather
intelligence (the “panopticon” effect) or to choke off rivals (the “chokepoint” effect, see also
Fishman, 2025). Such analysis implies that the persistence of networked structures – and
their embedded power relations – is precisely what makes globalization resilient and strategi-
cally important, even in a geoeconomic “slowbalization” era characterized by fragmentation.
Likewise, scholars of economic geography find that cross-border production networks con-
tinue to “constitute the long-term structural architecture of the global economy” (Yeung and
Coe, 2015). Thus, whether globalization is waxing or waning, the network paradigm remains
central for understanding how trade, finance and communication reconfigure: it highlights
the very patterns of both interconnection and strategic control that survive geopolitical
tensions, crises or efforts to de-globalize.
Such network thinking also illuminates how states, firms and societies adapt to exter-
nal shocks and systemic change. For adaptation often occurs not through isolation but
through reconfigured ties. In practice, sub-national and national actors frequently respond
to global challenges (from economic crises, climate change to health pandemics) by form-
ing new transnational networks that redirect or pool resources, share knowledge and foster
new exchange patterns. Recent studies document that cities and regions form coalitions
(e.g. climate-city networks like C40) based on networks that allow the included actors to
weather disruptions that no single city or state could face alone (Trivi˜ no-Salazar, 2023).
Other examples include policy-diffusion or expert networks (for instance in public health or
environmentalgovernance), whichmayserveasconduitsforinnovation, allowingevenweaker
states or communities to adopt collective safeguards. In short, a networked lens shows adap-
tation as a multi-level, collaborative process: resilience derives not just from internal reforms
(policies) but also from how effectively actors plug into wider webs of exchange and support
(politics and relationships).
Second, in contrast to a passive role in the enforcement of rules, proactive state strate-
10

=== PAGE 12 ===
gies of adaptation are of crucial importance in the global network economy. State elites and
corporate heads experience or anticipate actual or future changes in the external contexts
in which they operate and craft formal and informal strategies to cope with this change.
This stance contrasts with traditional state-as-actor views: In adapting to a changing order,
states, rather than building on their economic and military capabilities alone, depend on
transnationally integrated intermediaries. In effect, adaptation brokerage networks allow a
state elite to position themselves as central game players, actively reworking transnational
ties to shape outcomes. Consistent with network-based IPE, network models “derive state
capabilities and influence from the network structure” (Oatley et al., 2013, p. 137) – meaning
states gain power from how they are connected rather than solely from their material capa-
bilities. Such a perspective foregrounds state-led initiatives (through policy, elite coalitions
and business networks) as strategic levers in global systems.
Network-based adaptation often aims to preserve rents, regime stability, or continued ac-
cess under systemic change. For example, rentier Gulf monarchies have created or expanded
sovereign wealth funds to centralize investment and stabilize patronage: studies show these
funds were introduced as “adaptive responses to external pressures” and as tools to sustain
political authority under volatile conditions (Montambault Trudelle, 2023). China’s lead-
ership likewise deploys state-centric networks: one analysis finds that China’s intense state
control of its financial institutions and the “internalization” of capital markets can itself be
understood as “an adaptive strategy” securing its development model within global capital-
ism (Birley, 2023). In Russia’s case, the Kremlin has forged a parallel economy after 2022,
re-routing trade and finance through rouble- and yuan-based mechanisms beyond Western
reach(Qu´ enelle,04.03.2025; N¨ olke,2025). Chineseexportsnowsupplyroughly70–90percent
of key imported inputs to Russia (Ng and Ma, 17.05.2024), exemplifying how non-Western
powers leverage global production and finance networks strategically to sustain core indus-
tries amidst external pressure. In each instance, ruling elites proactively rewire networks
– pooling rents at home and securing vital links abroad – rather than simply reacting to
11

=== PAGE 13 ===
external shocks.
This perspective highlights that adaptation is both strategic and reactive: states delib-
erately engineer network linkages to safeguard core interests in the face of external change.
Scholars of networked global governance emphasize that relational ties – not just raw ca-
pabilities – shape international order. Thus even without formal rule-making authority,
regimes can preserve rents by repositioning elites within global webs. Under conditions of
systemicchange(e.g., energytransitions, traderestructuring, blocformation), suchproactive
networking can smooth domestic transitions and protect regime stability. In short, ABNs
recast messy and disorderly change into a controlled brokerage game: the state itself, may it
be driven by ideology, opportunity or fears over regime survival, acts as a network manager,
rewiring connections to maintain rents and political authority.
Third, the operation of networks in the world economy at the service of state elites is
predicated on the existence of brokers, which manage the access to, control of and distri-
bution of resources via intermediate webs. Rather than the price-mediated, depersonalised
process described in liberal economic textbooks on globalization, networked brokerage is a
highly political and conflictual endeavour. In fact, brokerage often carries an inter-systemic
quality, mediating between competitive capitalist spaces of enforced profit-seeking and pre-
or post-capitalist spaces of monopolist rent extraction (Hoppe, forthcoming). The mech-
anisms specified below – translation, substitution, shielding – speak to the inter-systemic
quality of network brokerage.
Classic network theory and Sociology frame brokerage in terms of actors spanning gaps or
“structural holes” between groups (Burt, 2010) and forming “weak ties” (Granovetter, 1973)
that transmit novel information and allow resource exchange between otherwise separated
actors.5Burt’s seminal work shows that such brokers gain strategic advantage by bridging
5. Granovetter’s concept of weak ties highlights that casual acquaintances – not close friends – are often
the most valuable conduits for new information and opportunities. His study of job seekers revealed that
while strong ties (e.g. family, close friends) share overlapping knowledge, it is weak ties that bridge separate
social circles and introduce novel contacts, data, or job leads. These weak links, though low in emotional
intensityandinteractionfrequency, serveascrucialinformationbridgesacrossotherwisedisconnectedgroups,
enabling diverse flows of influence and innovation across social networks. In IPE, weak ties have become a
12

=== PAGE 14 ===
disconnected actor clusters – controlling information flows and substituting isolated contacts
with a connected network position. Actor–Network Theory (Latour, 2007) offers a comple-
mentary view: translation is an active process of enrolling and transforming actors, so that
one actor or artifact may stand in for or substitute another within the network. Network
closure (Coleman, 1988) then plays a shielding role: dense ties within a group build trust
and shared norms that insulate insiders even as brokers connect to outsiders. In sum, these
frameworks conceptualize brokerage as involving three core mechanisms (see Table 1): trans-
lation of meaning across domains, substitution of nodes or resources when ties are rewired,
and shielding of core ties by network structure.
ScholarsofIPEandregulationhaveidentifiedthesemechanismsinpractice. Forinstance,
analyses of sanctions-evasion networks document intense substitution: sanctioned firms are
routinely replaced by new shell companies or intermediaries, so that “sanctioning a person
or a company will just cause another to appear in its place” (Allison and Saiz Erausquin,
2023). Intransnationalregulatoryregimes, technocraticbrokers oftenshieldthemselvesfrom
accountability by forming expert networks that insulate policy advice from democratic over-
sight (Freyburg et al., 2017). Knowledge-brokering studies of climate and finance similarly
find active translation of norms across borders – as science is reframed into policy language
– alongside substitution of formal channels by alternative institutions. For example, recent
research links rising climate risk to an expansion of unregulated shadow-banking networks
that substitute for traditional banks under tight regulation (Deku and Morris, 2025).
core metaphor for understanding how states and global actors navigate fragmented global systems. Farrell
and Newman’s framework of “weaponized interdependence” builds on this logic: states that control central
nodes in global networks (like banking rails or internet infrastructure) can disrupt adversary access, while
states outside these central circuits rely on weak ties – such as alternative legal channels, informal brokers,
and non-Western partners – to maintain linkages and circumvent chokepoints. Likewise, literature on global
value chains emphasizes that peripheral countries often build resilience by cultivating distant, low-density
connections to multiple global hubs, rather than relying solely on deep ties with a single dominant partner –
effectively using weak ties as a buffer against shocks. Thus, the concept of weak ties explains how informal,
flexible, and cross-cutting connections sustain regimes under pressure. They enable states or elites to bypass
formal barriers or dominant powers by creating alternative pathways – hallmarks of adaptation brokerage
networks. In this way, weak ties are not just social phenomena; they’re strategic tools enabling states and
adaptation brokers to remain connected even when formal channels fray under sanctions, geopolitical rivalry,
or competitive exclusion.
13

=== PAGE 15 ===
Together, these cases illustrate how global networks use the inter-systemic translation
of ideas and practices, the substitution of actors, trade connections, or rent channelling
schemes, and the shielding via overlapping institutions to circumvent constraints in sanctions
evasion, global financial regulation, climate governance and diplomatic exclusion. Table 1
provides an overview of these three mechanisms, including definitions, descriptions of the
state-mediated processes by which network actors identify external imperatives to adapt
and react accordingly, and examples for each of the three mechanisms. Moreover, the table
indicates the network signatures most affected by the respective mechanism. Each of these
signatures will be introduced in more detail in the methodology section of the paper.
14

=== PAGE 16 ===
Table 1: Mechanisms, Definitions, Processes, Network Signatures, and Examples
Mechanism Definition Process Network Signature Examples
Translation Turning a domestic logic
or asset into a form legi-
ble to an external regimeIdentify domestic projects
or rent streams that for-
eign rules would reject.
Reframe documentation,
accounting, marketing to
meet target standards.
Broker certification via
specialized intermediariesHigh betweenness scores
for dual-embedded trans-
lators bridging domestic
and foreign clusters.
Dense cross-layer ties be-
tween source and target
layers.Rebranding a petrochemi-
calupgradeasa“greenhy-
drogen” project.
Issuing ICMA-compliant
Green Bonds for state
bank lending.
Substitution Replacing a blocked chan-
nelwithanalternatepath-
wayDetect when primary
corridor is closed (e.g.
SWIFT, trade licence).
Identify substitute route
(another country, mecha-
nism).
Forge new partnerships or
shell entities to rewire the
network.Sharp edge churn post-
shock, with old ties
dissolving and new ones
emerging.
Formation of modu-
lar sub-clusters (e.g.
sanctions-evasion cells).Rerouting finance from
EU clearinghouses into
Gulf-based payment sys-
tems.
Using a Dubai shell com-
pany for sanctioned im-
ports.
Shielding Creating buffer zones so
intermediaries absorb le-
gal, material or reputa-
tional riskAssess which assets or ac-
tivitiescarryhighestexpo-
sure.
Construct protective layer
(shell, nominee, SPV).
Maintainbyrotatingman-
agers or refreshing struc-
tures.High clustering around
central principals, forming
a protective ring.
Persistent two-hop ties:
principals connect exter-
nally only via shield nodesHolding trades via a
Cayman-registered insur-
ance vehicle to protect
the parent firm.
Using a nominee trustee
in a third country to
custody sensitive assets.
15

=== PAGE 17 ===
The ABN framework allows for the formulation of three theoretical hypotheses, each
examining how network structure and dynamics respond to external pressures and internal
strategies of adaptation. While not all of the propositions can be explored in this paper,
particularly because the construction and multiplex analysis of network layers has not yet
been implemented, they shall serve the overarching project as a guidance.
H1: Externalcrisessystematicallyincreasecross-layerbrokeragedensitywithin
adaptation brokerage networks.
Intheoreticalterms, thishypothesispositsthatwhenformalinstitutionaltiesbreakdown
due to economic sanctions or trade barriers, actors seek alternative pathways to maintain
essential economic and political linkages. Networks respond strategically by activating and
intensifying brokerage roles across thematic layers (finance, sanctions-evasion, diplomacy,
climate). Empirically, this can be tested through the measure of brokerage density, which
captures the extent to which actors occupy bridging positions between distinct layers. An
increase in brokerage density after a crisis event (for example, a new sanction tranche) would
indicate that brokers are actively reconfiguring the network to sustain resource flows, thus
demonstrating strategic adaptation.
H2: Actors with higher degrees of domestic political embeddedness exhibit
greater agility in transitioning between network layers.
This hypothesis suggests that political elites, state-owned enterprises, or corporate actors
closely connected to central political decision-makers will exhibit higher strategic flexibility
and therefore more frequent movements across network layers. The theoretical rationale
is that politically embedded actors enjoy superior access to information, legitimacy, and
resources, allowing them to rapidly pivot across finance, sanctions, diplomacy, and climate
governance spheres. Empirically, layer transition frequency (LTF) offers a robust measure
of such agility: actors with higher LTF scores are those who repeatedly shift their presence
between different layers over time. Testing this hypothesis involves comparing LTF scores
16

=== PAGE 18 ===
across nodes while simultaneously measuring their degree of political embeddedness (e.g.,
formal political ties, board appointments, or direct state ownership).
H3: More centralized adaptation brokerage networks correlate with shorter
adaptation lags following external shocks.
This third hypothesis asserts that centralization within adaptation brokerage networks –
where fewer intermediaries coordinate more connections – facilitates quicker and more effi-
cient network-level responses to external disruptions, such as geopolitical shifts or regulatory
shocks. The theoretical underpinning is that centralized networks can rapidly mobilize re-
sources, disseminate information, and enforce new organizational routines through tightly
coordinated brokerage. To test this empirically, one could compute network centralization
metrics (e.g., centralization based on node degree or betweenness centrality) and measure
the temporal gap (adaptation lag) between an external shock (as recorded in the Events
sheet) and subsequent shifts in network structure, particularly the establishment of new or
substitute ties. A negative correlation between network centralization and adaptation lag
would support this hypothesis, underscoring the strategic advantage conferred by concen-
trated brokerage structures.
The preliminary evidence presented in this paper, especially the finding that institutions
such as the RDIF have been repurposed for developmental, diplomatic, health and sanction-
evasion objectives, depending on the geopolitical and economic context in which the Russian
state had to operate, points to the validity of the cross-layer brokerage capacity of important
network actors (H1). Moreover, as the tentative network analysis shows, the RDIF has
remained tightly integrated in Russia’s domestic political economy, positioning it as a highly
agile adaptation broker for the Russian state (H2). Finally, centralization within the RDIF’s
networks, facilitated by the well-networked broker Dmitriev, serves the Kremlin’s capacity
to quickly respond to geopolitical "windows of opportunity" (H3), such as the engagement
between Russia and the US after the inauguration of the Trump II administration in 2025.
While the evidence presented below remains indicative, further data cleaning, advanced node
17

=== PAGE 19 ===
attributing and edge layering will allow a more fine-grained, multiplex network analysis of
the above hypotheses.
3 Methodology
This section outlines the methodological approach used to operationalise the ABN concept.
The methodology aims at capturing, visualising, empirically analysing and comparing ABNs.
In a first step, I justify the case selection and describe how the networks around Dmitriev
and the RDIF have been reconstructed. The second sub-section details the data collection
strategy, analytical tools and metrics applied to the data. The third sub-section reflects on
the limitations and challenges encountered throughout this early phase of the project and
lays out the future steps allowing for a more fine-grained, robust and comparative network
analysis of Dmitriev’s ABN.
3.1 Case Selection and Network Construction
To operationalize the ABN framework, the paper focuses on a critical, information-rich ego-
network: Kirill Dmitriev, CEO of the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF) since 2011
and, since 2025, Special Presidential Envoy on Foreign Investment and Economic Cooper-
ation. Dmitriev has been operating at the service of Russian state power across various
thematic arenas: his fields of activity range from global finance, sanctions evasion, climate
and environmental, social and governance (ESG) initiatives, and multipolar diplomacy, mak-
ing him an ideal gateway through which to observe how networks and brokerage help Russia
adapt to global change. Moreover, existing scholarship has identified sovereign wealth funds
(SWFs), such as the RDIF, as one of the main state-led vehicles for adapting to the macro-
structural processes of globalisation and financialisation (Haberly, 2011). At the same time,
sociological research on the management and practices of non-Western SWFs in particular
indicates that these funds are deeply permeated by personalist logics and cannot be grasped
18

=== PAGE 20 ===
by an aggregate analysis of investment flows alone (Montambault Trudelle, 2023). Therefore,
focusing on one particular individual actor (Dmitriev) in charge of a state-related economic
institutionalvehicle(RDIF)andconstructinganego-networkarounditkeepstheexploratory
phase of the project tractable while maximizing theoretical leverage: If ABN mechanisms
are visible around a well-documented broker, they are likely to be present in other realms of
Russia’s political economy and in comparative constellations in other countries.
To capture the fact that Dmitriev as well as other individuals often occupy formal roles
within organizations, the constructed Node Sheet is multiplex: It includes every distinct
actor – whether a person, a company, a government agency or an NGO – and distinguishes
them by node type attributes. In this paper, reflecting the present, exploratory stage of
the research project, only individual and organizational actors are distinguished from one
another, whereas the latter include simply all non-individual members (firms, organizations,
institutions, agencies, funds etc.). Categorising nodes in a more fine-grained way will later
allow the project to filter and combine modes at will (for example, to analyse only corpo-
rate networks, only personal ties, or the full multimodal graph) without losing sight of the
fact that people like Dmitriev serve as crucial entry-points into organizational or corporate
structures.
The Edge Sheet records two broad families of relationships. First, one attributional
category links individuals to the companies, organizations or institutions they lead or serve
(e.g. as board member, CEO or minister). A second attributional category keeps track
of transactional edges (e.g. co-investments, joint ventures, legal services etc.) that link
firms, funds, organizations and institutions to one another to capture deals, investments,
partnerships and joint projects. For this paper, however, the Edge Sheet only contains a
co-occurrence score for each edge, that is, how often two actors appear in different Russian-
language media articles.
In the further course of the project, I will apply an automated sentiment analysis to
assign each edge to one or more thematic layers – finance, sanctions, diplomacy, climate
19

=== PAGE 21 ===
– using binary flags (Y/N). Such a nuanced edge attribution based not only on weighted
co-occurrences, but also on different thematic layers, allows for differentiated analysis of
brokerage strength and resource flows within the adaptation brokerage networks. This mul-
tiplex layer assignment opens possibilities for a systematic analysis of cross-layer brokerage
and strategic transitions across different network domains. Future analyses conducted as
part of the project may isolate affiliation structures, trace pure deal networks, or map the
combined brokerage topology in which people and organizations co-produce Russia’s adap-
tation strategy.
By anchoring on an ego-centric design, the paper maintains analytical focus on adap-
tation brokerage while still mapping the secondary circuits that connect Russia to various
regimes of the global political-economic order. Additional thresholds, especially for node
occurrences and co-occurrences, mitigate the risk of combinatorial explosion and help to
prioritize significant over incidental relationships. Prescribing a clear cut-off also enhances
the transparency and reproducibility of the approach, indicating which nodes qualify, and
under what conditions.
3.2 Data Collection and Current Analytical Strategy
This paper argues that the main challenge for research into Russian and transnational net-
works more generally is not necessarily accessing data, but structuring and interpreting it.
For the digitalisation of information and the proliferation of online media over the past two
decades have fundamentally transformed the research landscape for geopolitics, (global) po-
litical economy, and elite sociology. With the advent of large-scale, text-based datasets —
spanning news archives, government disclosures, leaked documents, and business databases
— scholars now have (theoretically) unprecedented opportunities to map and analyse elite
networks and their strategies of adaptation in real time. However, as Limonier and Audinet
(2022) caution, this digital turn also introduces substantial methodological challenges. Is-
sues such as source bias, platform instability, and the deluge of unstructured data ("noise")
20

=== PAGE 22 ===
require balancing the speed and scale of computational techniques with rigorous, transparent
data curation and cleaning protocols.
A common thread running through recent research on Russian and transnational elite
networks is the use of computational tools to construct co-occurrence networks from digital
text corpora. However, the complexity and opacity of cross-border and cross-sectional elite
relationships and the fragmented, sometimes contradictory nature of available digital infor-
mation pose formidable obstacles to such an analysis. Cross-border and cross-layer networks
have particularities that go beyond the domestic Russian elite networks commonly analysed
in Russian Studies. Within the existing methodological landscape, the work of (2018) stands
out as a pioneering example of a SNA based in co-occurrence analysis: their study offers a
clear demonstration of how large-scale, media-based network extraction can illuminate elite
connections in a context of institutional flux, even if their empirical scope is rather narrow
(the wealth of Russian oligarchs) and temporally bounded (2004-5) as well as limited to
domestic networks. Yet their research - alongside subsequent work by others - provides a
crucial methodological foundation on which this paper’s more ambitious, outward-looking
analysis can build.
The approach taken by Lamberova and Sonin and our strategy for reconstructing the
Dmitriev adaptation brokerage network both employ large-scale, text-based extraction to
map connections among elites. Both projects begin with a curated “seed” list of relevant
actors - in their case, drawn from the Forbes rich list and Putin’s documented inner circle;
in ours, a hand-coded, functionally diverse group of roughly 200 entities that includes indi-
viduals, companies, and institutions linked to Kirill Dmitriev. In our case, this seed list has
been compiled by collecting and analysing English- and Russian-language media material,
investigative reports, and secondary academic literature. Both Lamberova and Sonin and we
deploy web scraping techniques and automated named entity recognition (NER) to collect
co-occurrence data from a corpus of Russian-language media, operating on the principle that
joint mention signifies a meaningful social or transactional tie.
21

=== PAGE 23 ===
Despite these shared methodological starting points, there are significant divergences
in scope, ambition, and analytical granularity. Lamberova and Sonin focus on a relatively
narrow, well-defined population of business elites and state insiders, constructing a binary
network - an edge is present if two actors co-occur in a news item — over a brief historical
window (2004–5). Their filtering is rigorous, and the resulting network is paired with econo-
metric analysis to test how connections to the Kremlin translate into business advantages,
particularly in terms of wealth accumulation. This approach is powerful for understanding
how elite relationships substitute for formal institutions in Russia’s transition period, but is
limited in its ability to capture complexity beyond the immediate political-business nexus
or adapt to multi-layered, temporal and cross-border dynamics.
By contrast, our project builds on these foundations but aims for greater theoretical and
empirical reach. Inspired by other methodologically innovative studies - such as Chang et
al.’s (2023) mapping of Russian oligarchs’ offshore networks using the ICIJ leak data, and
Zinoviev’s (2020) construction of a “kompromat” network from scandal records — we aim at
designing a multiplex, time-evolving network that encompasses not only individuals but also
organizations and institutions, coded for their participation in multiple, issue-specific layers:
finance, sanctions, diplomacy, and decarbonization. This design enables us to interrogate
not only the existence of ties but their contextual function and evolution, offering a richer
and more granular understanding of adaptation brokerage.
The empirical foundation of this study is a large-scale corpus of Russian-language media
coverage derived from the INTEGRUM database, one of the most comprehensive archives
of Russian and post-Soviet news content. Using the search query “Кирилл Дмитриев,” we
compiled a dataset containing more than 40,000 unique articles published between 2010 and
2025. This time span covers the entirety of Dmitriev’s public career, from his initial ap-
pearance in elite political-economic circles to his role in the post-2022 wartime environment.
The dataset captures reporting from a wide variety of outlets, ranging from business and
financial media to state-affiliated and independent political news sources. As INTEGRUM
22

=== PAGE 24 ===
aggregates content from thousands of sources across Russia and the wider post-Soviet re-
gion, it enables a broad reconstruction of the information environment in which Dmitriev’s
brokerage activities are documented.
To extract potential network actors from this corpus, we applied an NER pipeline in
Python to identify mentions of persons, organizations, and institutions. The output of
the NER was supplemented with an occurrence score indicating the number of articles in
which each entity appeared. In order to focus on relevant actors and reduce noise, countries
were excluded from the NER output, and a threshold of 50 occurrences was set as the
minimum for inclusion in the node list. This reduced the candidate list to a more manageable
size, after which a manual cleaning process removed false positives, irrelevant names, and
duplicates. The result was a refined set of approximately 1,000 nodes (out of 18,000 initially
identified entities), each representing an actor connected to Dmitriev’s network through
media-documented interactions.
We then performed a co-occurrence analysis. Usually, co-occurrence networks are often
reconstructed on the basis of media, legal, or even leaked sources and taken as a proxy for
underlying social or transactional relationships. Studies like Chang et al. (2023) and Mah-
davi (2019) demonstrate that even in opaque or authoritarian settings, elite networks can
be mapped by triangulating public co-mentions, shared events, and indirect ties revealed
in the digital record. This is particularly salient in Russia, where formal institutional data
is often lacking, and where informal networks play a crucial, if concealed, role in adap-
tation and resilience. To reconstruct Dmitriev’s network, we matched the refined node
list with 1,000 entities against the INTEGRUM corpus to detect instances in which two
nodes were mentioned in the same article. To capture temporal variation in the structure
of Dmitriev’s network, the dataset was sliced into four analytically distinct periods: pre-
Crimea (2010–2013), post-Crimea sanctions consolidation (2014–2020), the COVID period
(2020–2022), and wartime adaptation (2022–2025). An interactive web-based platform was
developed to allow exploratory analysis of the resulting networks. This tool enabled us to
23

=== PAGE 25 ===
perform threshold adjustments for both node occurrences and co-occurrences, as well as vi-
sualization of time-sliced networks through multiple layouts. It provided an environment
for identifying emerging patterns, tracking the evolution of actor prominence, and observing
structural changes across periods.
24

=== PAGE 26 ===
Table 2: Louvain Community Detection: Definitions and Interpretations
Term Mathematical Definition Substantive Interpretation
Louvain
MethodGreedy, multi-level maximization
of modularity Q: reassign nodes to
increase Q; contract communities
into super-nodes; iterate to
convergence.Cohesive blocs that interact more
within than across blocs; scalable
on large, noisy networks.
Modularity Q=1
2mP
ij
Aij−kikj
2m
δ(ci, cj).
Weighted: replace Aij, ki, mby
wij, si, w.Partition quality vs a
degree/strength-preserving null;
higher Qindicates more distinct
coalitions.
Resolution γ Q (γ) =
1
2mP
ij
Aij−γkikj
2m
δ(ci, cj).Controls granularity: low γ→
broader alliances; high γ→finer
sub-clusters.
Community Induced subgraph with
intra-community connectivity
significantly exceeding the null
expectation.Cohesive functional grouping
(policy/finance/diplomacy) with
dense internal ties.
Brokers Participation coefficient
Pi= 1−P
c 
ki,c/ki2(high Pi=
multi-community ties).Intermediaries linking blocs
(backchannels, joint ventures);
enable cross-cluster flows.
Temporal
ChangeRe-estimate on time slices;
compare partitions (adjusted
Rand/Jaccard); track node
reassignments.Re-alignment under shocks
(sanctions, pandemic, war); cluster
emergence/dissolution.
25

=== PAGE 27 ===
From the co-occurrence networks, we computed standard network metrics, including de-
gree centrality, betweenness centrality, and weighted edge counts, to quantify patterns of
connectivity and brokerage. We also conducted a Louvain community detection (see Ta-
ble 2), a widely used mathematical algorithm for identifying densely connected subgroups
within large networks. The Louvain method partitions the network into communities by
maximizing modularity, a measure of how well a given division captures intra-community
cohesion relative to inter-community ties. In the context of the SOVBROKE project, this
approach allows us to detect clusters of actors — such as state agencies, sovereign wealth
funds, or corporate consortia — that function as semi-autonomous substructures within the
broader adaptation brokerage network. Tracking the formation, dissolution, or reconfigura-
tion of these communities over time provides insight into how Dmitriev’s brokerage position
has been embedded in, and responsive to, shifting geopolitical and economic contexts.
However, it should be noted that, due to the early stage of the overarching project,
this paper necessarily remains at the level of media co-occurrence, which carries with it all
the unavoidable biases of Russian-language media material. Most media outlets scandalize
(e.g., Trump’s Ukraine diplomacy) and dramatize (e.g., the international race for a COVID
vaccine). In addition, smaller outlets tend to adopt the reports of larger agencies. With
regard to Russia in particular, most of the media outlets included in the study are close
to the state, meaning that developments favourable to the Kremlin are emphasized, while
negative ones are suppressed. All this means that - at the current stage - both the extracted
nodes and the reconstructed edges reflect the potential network (dynamics) of Dmitriev and
the RDIF. Through qualitative, manual, and detailed cleaning and further enrichment of
the network data in the coming months, we will transform the reconstructed networks from
potential to actualone.
Nonetheless, our approach seeks to push the methodological frontier by integrating mul-
tiplex SNA, temporal network analysis, and a broader, more functionally differentiated actor
set. In doing so, we aim to illuminate not only how adaptation brokerage networks operate
26

=== PAGE 28 ===
in the Russian context, but also how these methods and insights can inform the study of
elite adaptation and resilience in other settings marked by uncertainty, fragmentation, and
systemic change. Our project’s contribution to the literature on global political economy and
eliteadaptationisthusunderpinnedbydigitalmethodinnovationandsubstantivecontextual
sensitivity.
3.3 Limitations and Further Steps
A significant methodological challenge for the paper arises from increasing data opacity in
the Russian context after 2022, particularly in the wake of heightened wartime secrecy and
restricted media environments. This means that for many recent or evolving relationships,
the available information is fragmentary, indirect, or absent altogether. Confidence scores,
to be established in a later stage of the project, are thus especially important in flagging
potential blind spots or weakly documented ties in the network, reminding readers that
Russian (and especially post-2022) data carries inherent limitations. To ensure transparency
and replicability in the construction of the network, each entry in the dataset is assigned
both a confidence level and a unique source reference code. This practice allows subsequent
users of the data to trace the provenance of every node and edge, evaluate the reliability of
the evidence supporting each connection, and replicate the coding decisions. As such, while
the network provides a robust map of potential adaptation brokerage, users should remain
alert to the zones of higher uncertainty.
Moreover, as much as some critical connections may be under-represented due to con-
straintsinsourceaccessibility,anevenbiggerproblematthisexploratorystageofthenetwork
analysis is that some connections are significantly inflated and overrepresented due to media
biases. Further cleaning and in-depth qualitative data enrichment in the next phase of the
project will ensure that the refined network reconstruction is closer to Dmitriev’s actual
cross-border web of relationships.
Further project work on Dmitriev’s network will focus on two additional network metrics:
27

=== PAGE 29 ===
We will focus on Brokerage Density and Layer Transition Frequency (LTF) as two comple-
mentary network metrics to capture different dimensions of adaptation brokerage. Brokerage
Density measures the extent to which actors in an ABN occupy bridging positions between
otherwise disconnected groups or layers. A higher Brokerage Density indicates a network in
which intermediaries are collectively more active in translation and substitution roles. LTF,
in turn, captures an actor’s dynamic agility across thematic layers over time. For each actor
we record the sequence of layers in which they maintain at least one active tie at succes-
sive time points. Actor with higher LTF scores are more strategically flexible — quickly
re-routing ties between finance, sanctions, diplomacy, and climate — than actors with lower
scores. Conversely, a low transition rate indicates greater stability or rigidity, suggesting the
actor remains consistently embedded in the same thematic layer. This measurement allows
to quantify the adaptability of actors within the ABN and compare how different actors
respond to structural changes such as sanctions, trade barriers, or shifts in global regulatory
environments. Together, these measures reveal not only who the key brokers are, but also
how and when they rewire ties across domains, providing a dynamic map of Russia’s evolving
adaptation networks under conditions of geopolitical stress.
4 The Kirill Dmitriev Network: Preliminary Evidence
This section presents preliminary evidence on the actors, structures, and evolution of cross-
border networks associated with Kirill Dmitriev, the head of the Russian Direct Investment
Fund (RDIF), from 2010 to 2025. The first sub-section summarises the network’s general
characteristics and evolutionary patterns, visualising mathematically distinguishable clusters
and their changes over time derived from a Louvain community detection algorithm. Lou-
vain communities reflect cohesive sub-networks of actors whose internal density and external
bridging functions indicate distinct strategic blocs within Dmitriev’s brokerage network (see
also Table 2). The sub-section also discusses the most important emerging actors throughout
28

=== PAGE 30 ===
the period under scrutiny. While the network adapts markedly in response to major geopolit-
ical and economic shocks — shifting its international orientation, reconfiguring key brokerage
positions, and absorbing new actors — certain structural features remain strikingly stable.
Core domestic hubs around the RDIF and select state-linked financial institutions persist
across all time periods, anchoring the network even as its peripheries expand, contract, or
reorient. This combination of adaptive flexibility and institutional continuity is central to
understanding Dmitriev’s enduring role as a patronal broker in Russia’s political economy.
The second sub-section focuses on the period from 2010 to 2013, during which the RDIF
established itself as a key institution in Russia’s political economy and Dmitriev began
his ’second career’ as a globally connected broker serving Russian state power. The data
presented is indicative of Dmitriev’s and the RDIF’s relatively diverse network at the time,
with links to European and Asian financial and developmental actors, as well as close ties
with some of Russia’s most important domestic economic actors.
The third sub-section focuses on the years following Russia’s annexation of the Ukrainian
peninsula of Crimea. From 2014 to 2020, following the introduction of modest Western
sanctions, the RDIF began to diversify its relationships while strengthening its ties with
Russia’s domestic economy. Relations with European actors were replaced by more active
engagement with BRICS, Gulf, Saudi, Chinese and US actors. This indicates that, even
at this early stage, the Russian state’s strategy for weathering sanctions included proactive
global diversification, which could later be built upon in the face of even greater geopolitical
pressure.
The fourth sub-section examines Dmitriev’s and the RDIF’s network evolution during the
global COVID-19 pandemic from 2020 to 2022. The preliminary findings clearly illustrate
what can be termed the broker-mediated institutional repurposing of the RDIF as a vehicle
for health crisis diplomacy. Not only were Dmitriev and the RDIF involved in financing and
facilitating the development of Russia’s Sputnik V anti-COVID vaccine domestically, they
were also actively promoting the export of the novel drug internationally. Furthermore, the
29

=== PAGE 31 ===
data indicates that, during this period, Dmitriev was repurposed as a close Putin associate
to establish an initial diplomatic backchannel with the Trump I administration.
The fifth sub-section presents insights into changes to Dmitriev’s and the RDIF’s net-
works since Russia’s full-scale military invasion of Ukraine. From 2022 to 2025, the network
underwent another repurposing. With unprecedented sanctions imposed by Western states
and increasing isolation from Western networks, the RDIF undertook a dual shift. Economi-
cally, itsnetworksbecamemoredomestic, firmlyconsolidatingtheinstitutionwithinRussia’s
war-adaptation economy. Internationally, the RDIF — and Dmitriev in particular — shifted
its focus away from attracting foreign investment to Russia, instead reinventing itself as a
diplomatic hub for special missions. These include facilitating negotiations between Trump
and Putin over Ukraine and arranging highly personalised, large-scale business deals with
non-Western actors.
Each of the following sub-sections is supported by a set of complementary empirical
outputs designed to visualise and quantify network change over time. Time-sliced network
graphs for each period provide an intuitive overview of the structural evolution of Dmitriev’s
connections, while associated network metrics and centrality rankings highlight shifts in
the prominence and brokerage roles of individual actors. In addition, community structure
visualisationsderivedfromtheLouvainalgorithmrevealcohesiveclusterswithinthenetwork,
allowing us to trace how strategic sub-groups emerge, dissolve, or reconfigure in response to
external shocks. Taken together, these outputs serve to ground the narrative interpretation
in observable structural patterns, linking changes in the network’s composition and topology
to the adaptive strategies identified in the analysis.
4.1 General Patterns
Across the 2010–2025 period, the Dmitriev network displays both remarkable adaptability
and a persistent underlying architecture. This sub-section takes a panoramic view of the
network’s evolution, identifying the central actors, mapping shifts in their relative impor-
30

=== PAGE 32 ===
tance, and highlighting the emergence and decline of distinct clusters over time. The analysis
draws on time-sliced network graphs, centrality metrics, and community detection outputs
to illustrate how changes in geopolitical and economic conditions — from Crimea to COVID
to full-scale war — reconfigure the network’s periphery, while its core remains anchored by
enduring domestic institutions and long-standing partnerships.
The four stylised network graphs presented in the Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4 depict the top 50
actors in the Dmitriev network across four distinct periods: pre-Crimea (2010–2013), post-
Crimea (2014–2020), COVID (2020–2022), and war (2022–2025). Each node is colour-coded
to indicate the period in which it first entered the top 50, allowing to track both continuity
and change over time. The networks are drawn from a time-sliced co-occurrence analysis of
Russian-language media articles mentioning Dmitriev, based on over 40,000 unique articles
from the INTEGRUM database (see section 3). Presenting the results in this visual form
servesadualpurpose: ithighlightsthestructuralstabilityofthenetwork’scorewhilemaking
visible the influx and disappearance of actors in response to external shocks. By avoiding
exhaustive labelling or excessive statistical annotation, the visuals aim to give an intuitive
sense of network composition, density, and the shifting role of new entrants over time.
Taken together, the four visuals reveal a network that adapts selectively in response to
geopolitical and economic shocks while retaining a stable core of highly centralised actors.
In the pre-Crimea period, the network is relatively balanced between domestic political-
economic actors and international partners. Following the annexation of Crimea in 2014,
the post-Crimea graph shows the loss of some Western-linked institutions and the introduc-
tion of new ties to BRICS and non-Western actors. The COVID period marks a thematic
repurposing of the network, incorporating public health agencies and pandemic-related in-
stitutions while keeping core economic and political nodes intact. The war period graph
shows the most dramatic transformation, with Western actors largely absent, a denser do-
mestic clustering, and the emergence of war-specific brokers. Across all periods, the RDIF,
Putin, and a small circle of state-linked firms retain their central position, underscoring the
31

=== PAGE 33 ===
network’s resilience.
In the pre-Crimea period (Figure 1), the network is characterised by a relatively even
distribution of domestic and international actors, reflecting Dmitriev’s role in positioning the
RDIF as a globally connected sovereign investment fund. Prominent nodes include major
Russianstate-ownedenterprises(e.g.,Sberbank,Gazprombank,VTB),high-rankingpolitical
figures (e.g., Putin, Shuvalov, Ulyukaev), and international financial organisations such as
the IMF, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and Goldman
Sachs. The structure suggests a dual orientation: securing domestic political backing while
cultivatingstronglinkswithglobalcapitalmarketsandmultilateraldevelopmentinstitutions.
ThisbalanceforeshadowstheRDIF’sinitialoperationalstrategyasabridgebetweenRussian
state power and international finance.
32

=== PAGE 34 ===
Figure 1: Top 50 actors of the Dmitriev network, pre-Crimea period
33

=== PAGE 35 ===
The post-Crimea network (Figure 2) reflects a clear reorientation in response to Western
sanctions and deteriorating relations with Europe and the United States. Several Western
actors from the Pre-Crimea graph are absent, replaced by new connections to Gulf, Chinese,
and BRICS-affiliated institutions. The appearance of Trump as a node indicates the cultiva-
tion of personalised political links in the United States, while increased visibility of entities
such as the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and ALROSA underscores a pivot
toward resource diplomacy and alternative investment partners. Despite these changes, core
Russian political-economic institutions, including VEB and the Ministry of Finance, remain
centralpartnersfortheRDIF,suggestingcontinuityinthedomesticbackboneofthenetwork.
The COVID-period network (Figure 3) illustrates a thematic repurposing of Dmitriev’s
brokerage role, with the RDIF at the centre of a pandemic-oriented diplomatic and com-
mercial agenda. New nodes such as the Gamaleya Research Institute, R-Pharm, and the
Ministry of Health reflect the institutional infrastructure mobilised for the Sputnik V vac-
cine project. The presence of international political figures like Joe Biden and the European
Commission highlights the RDIF’s attempts to use vaccine diplomacy as a soft-power tool,
even amid worsening geopolitical tensions. At the same time, enduring domestic power
nodes—Putin, the Federation Council, Sberbank—anchor the network, ensuring that health
diplomacy operates in conjunction with long-standing political-economic priorities.
34

=== PAGE 36 ===
Figure 2: Top 50 actors of the Dmitriev network, post-Crimea period
35

=== PAGE 37 ===
Figure 3: Top 50 actors of the Dmitriev network, COVID period
36

=== PAGE 38 ===
Figure 4: Top 50 actors of the Dmitriev network, war period
37

=== PAGE 39 ===
Finally, the war period graph (Figure 4) depicts the most pronounced restructuring of the
network, shaped by unprecedented Western sanctions and Russia’s growing isolation from
the global financial system. Almost all previously included Western institutional actors
are absent, replaced by a more insular constellation of domestic political, economic, and
security-linked entities. The network becomes denser, with stronger interconnections among
remainingactors, reflectingaconsolidationofeliteresourcesinsupportofthewaradaptation
economy. Internationally, the surviving foreign connections are concentrated in non-Western
partners such as BRICS members, OPEC+, and high-level diplomatic intermediaries. The
RDIF’s role appears to shift away from investment attraction toward functioning as a high-
level diplomatic and economic broker, engaging in “special missions” that blend political
negotiation with large-scale non-Western business deals.
The visual patterns observed in the four time-sliced network graphs provide an intuitive
foundation for the Louvain community detection and centrality metrics introduced later
in this section. At the same time, the colour-coded entry points of nodes across periods
already hint at the structural segmentation that the Louvain algorithm formally identifies -
grouping actors into communities based on their density of interconnections relative to the
network as a whole. In practice, these communities correspond to functional or geopolitical
sub-networks.
38

=== PAGE 40 ===
Figure 5: Stylized top actors Louvain community, pre-Crimea period
39

=== PAGE 41 ===
Figure 6: Stylized top actors Louvain community, post-Crimea period
40

=== PAGE 42 ===
Figure 7: Stylized top actors Louvain community, COVID period
41

=== PAGE 43 ===
Figure 8: Stylized top actors Louvain community, war period
42

=== PAGE 44 ===
Table 3 lists the 20 most central actors in the Dmitriev network for the entire 2010–2025
period, ranked by a composite score that integrates centrality metrics alongside frequency of
occurrence and total edge count. Logically, given the co-occurrence-based network construc-
tion around Dmitriev, the list is headed by the RDIF, which occupies a dominant position
acrossallcentralitymeasuresandfarexceedsallothersinoccurrenceandedgecount. There-
maining top actors include senior political leaders (e.g., Vladimir Putin, Dmitry Medvedev),
major state-owned enterprises and financial institutions (e.g., Vnesheconombank, Sberbank,
Gazprom, Rosneft), key state bodies (e.g., the Federation Council, Ministry of Finance), and
selected international figures and institutions (e.g., Donald Trump, the UN General Assem-
bly, BRICS). Each entry shows a different profile across the centrality metrics — some actors
combine high degree and closeness scores with low betweenness, while others rank highly for
brokerage roles despite fewer direct ties.
The ranking underscores the extent to which the Dmitriev network is embedded in Rus-
sia’s state–capital nexus, with the RDIF as a critical hub linking government leadership,
state-owned corporations, and international interlocutors. The mix of domestic political au-
thorities, economic institutions, and selected global actors illustrates the dual anchoring of
the network: it is deeply rooted in the structures of Russia’s state-permeated extractivist
political economy while maintaining targeted external linkages that support its adaptive ca-
pacity. The presence of figures like Donald Trump and platforms such as the UN General
Assembly and BRICS highlights the strategic brokerage role of Dmitriev’s network in lever-
aging high-profile international relationships for political and economic purposes. These
findings lend empirical weight to the paper’s argument that ABNs are shaped by both
structural continuity in core domestic relationships and selective, event-driven international
engagements that expand or contract in response to geopolitical shocks.
Figure 11 shows scatter-plots of monthly occurrence frequencies for the ten most central
actors in the Dmitriev network across the four analysed periods: pre-Crimea (blue), post-
Crimea (green), COVID (orange), and the war period (red). The plots reveal variation in
43

=== PAGE 45 ===
Table 3: Top 20 Actors by Composite Score – All Periods Combined
Rank Actor Composite Degree Closeness Occurrences Edge Count
1 Российский фонд прямых
инвестиций (РФПИ)0.8244 1 .0000 73 .1250 36428 233136
2 Владимир Путин 0.4485 0 .9875 72 .4530 8764 98985
3 Кирилл Дмитриев 0.4254 0 .9770 72 .4335 8498 53316
4 Внешэкономбанк (ВЭБ) 0.4127 0 .9080 71 .6794 3473 59517
5 Сбербанк 0.4084 0 .9358 70 .8172 2672 58382
6 Совет Федерации 0.4043 0 .8744 70 .0068 1680 52740
7 ОАО «РЖД» 0.4030 0 .9022 70 .7451 2226 52127
8 Дмитрий Медведев 0.4003 0 .9271 70 .6935 2288 47732
9 Министерство финансов 0.3967 0 .9032 70 .4424 2077 52537
10 Московская биржа 0.3956 0 .8763 70 .7011 2189 43341
11 Банк ВТБ 0.3898 0 .8926 70 .2834 1964 42727
12 ОАО «Газпром» 0.3887 0 .8917 69 .6051 1569 45904
13 ОАО «Ростелеком» 0.3875 0 .8715 69 .4450 2069 30166
14 Роснефть 0.3858 0 .8677 70 .0504 1747 40189
15 Федеральная антимонопольная
служба (ФАС)0.3857 0 .8821 69 .1998 1475 38229
16 Дональд Трамп 0.3856 0 .8245 71 .7935 4872 41822
17 Сергей Лавров 0.3789 0 .8217 71 .0520 2683 42944
18 Генеральная Ассамблея ООН 0.3765 0 .8428 69 .3504 1457 36903
19 Дмитрий Песков 0.3745 0 .8418 70 .5089 2419 28690
20 БРИКС 0.3728 0 .8552 69 .9301 1699 23467
salience over time, with the RDIF, Dmitriev, and Putin consistently visible, while actors
like Donald Trump, Steven Witkoff, or the Gamaleya Institute show more episodic promi-
nence, depending on the purpose the state attached to the RDIF in the respective period.
Trend lines are added to each panel, highlighting whether mentions increase or decline across
periods.
Figure 10 applies the same method to a different set of twelve selected actors. Here,
attention is given to institutions like Vnesheconombank, Sberbank, Gazprom, the China In-
vestment Corporation, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, along-
side figures such as Sergey Chemezov. These plots underscore the differing trajectories of
domestic versus foreign actors: Russian institutions exhibit recurrent mentions across peri-
ods, while international actors often show steep declines or sudden absences coinciding with
geopolitical shifts.
Figure 9 traces the evolution of composite centrality scores for the ten most significant
actors across the four periods. It highlights continuity of figures such as Putin, Dmitriev,
44

=== PAGE 46 ===
and Lavrov, alongside newcomers or episodic actors like the Gamaleya Institute during the
pandemic and U.S. politicians (e.g., Rubio, Trump) during conflict-driven phases. The tra-
jectories show both stable core actors and fluctuating prominence depending on shocks and
crises.
Individually, the visuals illustrate different facets of network adaptation. The first two
sets of occurrence frequency regressions emphasize how media salience shifts with global and
domestic events. RDIF and Dmitriev remain consistently embedded in coverage, signaling
the institutionalization of their role as brokers of global engagement, even as surrounding
actors shift. By contrast, the steep rise and fall of entities like the Gamaleya Institute
during the COVID period reflects event-driven spikes that leave little long-term imprint.
Foreign actors such as Trump or the EBRD show a different pattern: salience is tied not
only to events but to Russia’s shifting international alignments, highlighting the fragility of
transnational brokerage under sanctions and conflict.
The composite score evolution complements these observations by synthesizing structural
importance into a comparative trajectory. It shows that while actors like Putin, Dmitriev,
and RDIF maintain their centrality across shocks, others — such as Vnesheconombank or
Gazprom — gradually lose significance, displaced by figures or institutions linked to the
emerging contexts of health diplomacy (COVID) or wartime alliances (2022 onwards). In-
terestingly, the chart also reveals that some international figures (e.g., Trump) achieve cen-
trality despite — or perhaps because of — political antagonism, underscoring how adversarial
actors can still structure Russia’s adaptation networks.
Takentogether, thevisualscapturebothresilienceandplasticityintheDmitrievnetwork.
The resilience lies in the enduring prominence of a core broker set (Putin, Dmitriev, RDIF),
while the plasticity is reflected in how peripheral and international nodes enter and exit with
global shocks. Comparing across the visuals, one can see that occurrence frequency alone
does not determine long-term centrality: actors like the Gamaleya Institute spiked during
COVID but dropped sharply afterwards, whereas Dmitriev’s more modest but consistent
45

=== PAGE 47 ===
salience translates into stable composite centrality. This juxtaposition makes clear that the
brokerage network adapts dynamically but also preserves a core of institutionalized actors,
aligning well with the argument about Russia’s strategies of adaptive global engagement.
46

=== PAGE 48 ===
Figure 9: Composite score evolution for the Top 10 network actors
47

=== PAGE 49 ===
Figure 10: Regression graphs for 12 selected actors
48

=== PAGE 50 ===
Figure 11: Regression graphs for Top 10 actors
49
